Garbage Collection
Java has some key benefi ts that you’ll need to k now for the exam:
Object Oriented Java is an object-oriented language, which means all code is defi ned in
classes and most of those classes can be instantiated into objects. We’ll discuss this more
throughout the book. Many languages before Java were procedural, which meant there were
routines or methods but no classes. Another common approach is functional programming.
Java allows for functional programming within a class, but object oriented is still the main
organization of code.
Encapsulation Java supports access modifi ers to protect data from unintended access
and modifi cation. Most people consider encapsulation to be an aspect of object-oriented
languages. Since the exam objectives call attention to it specifi cally, so do we.
Platform Independent Java is an interpreted language because it gets compiled to
bytecode. A key benefi t is that Java code gets compiled once rather than needing to be
recompiled for different operating systems. This is known as “write once, run everywhere.”
On the OCP exam, you’ll learn that it is possible to write code that does not run everywhere. For example, you might refer to a fi le in a specifi c directory. If you get asked on the
OCA exam, the answer is that the same class fi les run everywhere.
Robust One of the major advantages of Java over C++ is that it prevents memory leaks.
Java manages memory on its own and does garbage collection automatically. Bad memory
management in C++ is a big source of errors in programs.
Simple Java was intended to be simpler than C++. In addition to eliminating pointers,
it got rid of operator overloading. In C++, you could write a + b and have it mean almost
anything.
Secure Java code runs inside the JVM. This creates a sandbox that makes it hard for Java
code to do evil things to the computer it is running on.
Summary
In this chapter, you saw that Java classes consist of members called fi elds and methods. An
object is an instance of a Java class. There are three styles of comment: a single-line comment (//), a multiline comment (/* */), and a Javadoc comment (/** */).
Java begins program execution with a main() method. The most common signature for
this method run from the command line is public static void main(String[] args).
Arguments are passed in after the class name, as in java NameOfClass firstArgument.
Arguments are indexed starting with 0.
Java code is organized into folders called packages. To reference classes in other packages, you use an import statement. A wildcard ending an import statement means you want
to import all classes in that package. It does not include packages that are inside that one.
java.lang is a special package that does not need to be imported.
Constructors create Java objects. A constructor is a method matching the class name and
omitting the return type. When an object is instantiated, fi elds and blocks of code are
initialized fi rst. Then the constructor is run.
Primitive types are the basic building blocks of Java types. They are assembled into
reference types. Reference types can have methods and be assigned to null. In addition to
“normal” numbers, numeric literals are allowed to begin with 0 (octal), 0x (hex), 0X (hex),
0b (binary), or 0B (binary). Numeric literals are also allowed to contain underscores as long
as they are directly between two other numbers.
Declaring a variable involves stating the data type and giving the variable a name.
Variables that represent fi elds in a class are automatically initialized to their corresponding “zero” or null value during object instantiation. Local variables must be specifi cally
initialized. Identifi ers may contain letters, numbers, $, or _. Identifi ers may not begin with
numbers.
Scope refers to that portion of code where a variable can be accessed. There are three
kinds of variables in Java, depending on their scope: instance variables, class variables, and
local variables. Instance variables are the nonstatic fi elds of your class. Class variables are
the static fi elds within a class. Local variables are declared within a method.
For some class elements, order matters within the fi le. The package statement comes fi rst
if present. Then comes the import statements if present. Then comes the class declaration.
Fields and methods are allowed to be in any order within the class.
Garbage collection is responsible for removing objects from memory when they can
never be used again. An object becomes eligible for garbage collection when there are no
more references to it or its references have all gone out of scope. The finalize() method
will run once for each object if/when it is fi rst garbage collected.
Java code is object oriented, meaning all code is defi ned in classes. Access modifi ers
allow classes to encapsulate data. Java is platform independent, compiling to bytecode. It is
robust and simple by not providing pointers or operator overloading. Finally, Java is secure
because it runs inside a virtual machine.